---
fig-cap-location: top
from: markdown+emoji
---

# **Exploratory analysis** 


<div class="questions">

### **Questions**{.unlisted}
- How can we evaluate the quality of our gene count matrix data using DESeq2? 
- What quality control techniques can we use to tidy our data?  
</div>  
</br>

Before performing any DE analysis, it is good to explore and visualise our data. This helps us to understand and get a sense of the quality of our data at this stage of the analysis. We'll be performing the following techniques in order to evaluate the quality of our raw counts data. 

## **Estimate the total library size across all samples**

Before performing any DE analysis, it is good to explore and visualise our data. This helps us to understand and get a sense of the quality of our data at this stage of the analysis.

```r
# Sum raw gene counts for each sample (each column)
colSums(counttable)
```

<div class="challenge">

### **Challenge** {.unlisted}

How do you think the differences in total library size could affect DE analysis?

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

Notice that the counts are different for each sample, which we will need to account for. Total library size can give us an indication of sensitivity (more reads = higher ability to detect lowly expressed genes). 

This was briefly discussed in the introductory slides. There are recommendations available online for how deeply you should sequence a sample, depending on the species. or if anything went wrong in the upstream analysis steps (e.g. no reads aligning to genes could indicate DNA contamination).

</details>
</div>  

## **Raw gene count distribution for each sample** 

Here we plot a boxplot of gene level raw counts (y axis) for each sample (x axis).

```r
boxplot(counttable,
        col="red")
```

<div class="challenge">

### **Challenge** {.unlisted}

How would you describe what you are seeing in the plot?

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

For most genes, the total number of raw counts are relatively low. We can visualise distribution better if the counts were on a log2 scale.

</details>
</div>  

```r
# Add 1 to make sure all values are > 0
boxplot(log2((counttable)+1),
        col="red")
```

The distribution of counts across samples is not comparable (although not too dissimilar in this case!). This is a consideration to take if you plan to use any statistical tests that assume an equal distribution of counts.

## **DESeq2 for exploratory analysis**

The DESeq2 package contains functions that perform normalization, data transformation, visualization and DE. This is a highly regarded and popular tool. We will use some of its functions to perform exploratory analysis.

This is a large package and we will only scratch the surface of key concepts in this workshop. We recommend you read the DESeq2 paper and manual before performing your own analysis.

* The original DESeq 2 (Love et al. 2014) paper is [here] (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8)

* The DESeq2 manual is [here](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html)

* A beginners guide (written by the DESeq2 authors) is [here](https://bioc.ism.ac.jp/packages/2.14/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/beginner.pdf)

### **Experimental design and the DESeqDataSet object** {.unlisted}

In order for DESeq2 to perform DE, we need to store data in a DESeqDataSet object (dds) which contains:

* Our count matrix file
* Our experimental information (“meta”) file
* Our design formula

For exploratory analysis, we set design = ~ 1 which tells DESeq2 to be blind to experimental groups. We do not want DESeq2 to account for any within group variability during exploratory analysis and quality checking. This will allow us to observe for any unexpected batch effects.


```r
# We will call this object by name 'dds' as this is a standard practice
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(countData = counttable, 
                              colData = meta, 
                              design = ~1)
```

## **Data transformation** 

Count data is transformed with regularized log (rlog) or variance stabilising transformation (vst), required before performing exploratory data analysis such as visualisation and clustering (e.g. PCA). Both methods produce data on the log2 scale, and normalize for other factors such as library size.

rlog performs slightly better, but can take a lot longer than vst if you have many samples. We will set blind = TRUE so that DESeq2 is blind to experimental groups, for the same reasons as previously described.

```r
# Calculate rlog and store it in a dds-like object
rlog <- rlog(dds, blind = TRUE)
rlog.data <- assay(rlog)
```

We can check the effect of transformation by using boxplots again. 

```r
boxplot(rlog.data,
        col="red")
```

Notice that the count distribution across samples is much more comparable with rlog transformed data.

## **Principal component analysis**

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a dimensionality reduction method that summarises high dimensionality data into a number of principal components (PCs). For RNA-Seq, our highly dimensional data is our per sample gene-expression data and the variance that exists across samples. We can observe the relationship between these in a simple 2D space, by plotting two components at a time (usually the top two that account for most of the variance).

```r
# DESeq2's plotPCA function will create a PCA plot using an object that has rlog or vst values
# It will colour samples using 
DESeq2::plotPCA(rlog)
```

**GS- this is incomplete, no ungrouped PCA yet and challenge needs a solution**

<div class="challenge">

### **Challenge** {.unlisted}

* Can you comment on how the samples cluster together in the plot?

* Is this what you would expect?

* If you saw one red dot cluster more closely with the blue dots, what might this suggest?

* How much of the overall variance is explained by PC1?

* How much of the overall variance is explained by PC1 & PC2?

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

</details>
</div>  

## **Sample-to-sample distances heatmap**

Another way to visualise how similar or dissimilar our samples are is to plot sample distances in a heatmap and a hierarchical cluster.

```r
# dist() calculates eucleadean distance, which requires data to be in a specific format
sampleDists <- dist(t(assay(rlog)))
sampleDistMatrix <- as.matrix(sampleDists)

# Get some pretty blue colours
colors <- colorRampPalette( rev(brewer.pal(9, "Blues")) )(255)

# Plot the sampleDistMatrix in a heatmap
# pheatmap also calculates and plots hierachical clusters 
pheatmap(sampleDistMatrix,
         clustering_distance_rows=sampleDists,
         clustering_distance_cols=sampleDists,
         col=colors)
```         

<div class="challenge">

### **Challenge** {.unlisted}

What do you notice about sample KO3?

<details>
<summary>Solution</summary>

The hierarchical cluster groups KO3 more closely with the wild type samples. This could be an indication that our knockout has not worked - although we have confirmed that it has in part 1 of this workshop! 

Another reason could be that the knockout effect is not as strong in this sample as the other KO samples - for reasons we do not yet know!

</details>
</div>  

Now that we've evaluated the integrity of our data, we can finally perform differential expression analysis: [Gene counts to differentially expressed genes > Differential expression](). **GS- this needs a link**

<div class="keypoints">

### **Key points**{.unlisted}

-   Performing exploratory analysis is required in order to understand our data and decide if the experimental variability is explained by the conditions of interest.
-   Exploratory analysis can also help to identify and avoid possible outlier samples from the experiment.
</div>
